README.md, before:

# Introduction

We propose a [surface (seafloor) tracking feature for ArduSub](https://github.com/clydemcqueen/ardupilot/tree/clyde_surftrak)
inspired by the [surface tracking feature in ArduCopter](https://ardupilot.org/copter/docs/terrain-following-manual-modes.html).
Surface tracking in ArduSub requires a down-facing rangefinder (e.g., the Blue Robotics Ping Sonar) and is activated by
selecting the new RNG_HOLD flight mode.

The [auto altitude control feature](https://discuss.bluerobotics.com/t/altimeter-and-auto-altitude/2039) was proposed previously.
This feature works by feeding rangefinder data into the ArduPilot EKF as the z position, replacing the barometer input.
This feature is not supported by the ArduSub team, but provides roughly the same functionality as surface tracking.

In this document, surface tracking is referred to as _surftrak_ and auto altitude is referred to as _auto_alt_.

The repository describes procedures to test surftrak and auto_alt in simulation, as well as the results of those tests.

We ran tests using the [ArduPilot SITL](https://ardupilot.org/dev/docs/using-sitl-for-ardupilot-testing.html)
simulator with 2 physics models:
* SITL using the built-in SIM_Submarine model; this is referred to as _SITL_
* SITL using [Gazebo Garden Sim](https://gazebosim.org/docs/all/getstarted),
the [ardupilot_gazebo plugin](https://github.com/ArduPilot/ardupilot_gazebo) and the
[bluerov2_ignition](https://github.com/clydemcqueen/bluerov2_ignition) vehicle model;
this is referred to as _Gazebo_

The SITL setup is simpler to install and uses known terrain data so the experiments can be repeated easily.

The SITL setup uses MAVLink and LOCAL_POSITION_NED messages to generate rangefinder values from the terrain data.
This setup introduces some lag.

The SITL setup behaved poorly in tests of auto_alt: the z value was much greater than 0, indicating that the sub 
was floating in the air. 

The Gazebo setup provides a much richer physics model and can be used to run many more
experiments. It works with both surftrak and auto_alt. The terrain data is generated on-the-fly by moving the sub
through the simulated world, so each experiment is unique.

# Procedure

## Install

Install ArduPilot from https://github.com/clydemcqueen/ardupilot in `~/ardupilot`

Install https://github.com/clydemcqueen/ardusub_surftrak in `~/projects/ardusub_surftrak`

Install https://github.com/clydemcqueen/bluerov2_ignition in `~/colcon_ws/src/bluerov2_ignition` and checkout the `ping_sonar` branch

Install https://github.com/ArduPilot/ardupilot_gazebo in `~/simulation/ardupilot_gazebo`

Install QGroundControl

Install Gazebo Garden

Set up some paths:
~~~
# Add ardusub_surftrak
export PATH=$HOME/projects/ardusub_surftrak:$PATH

# Add ardupilot autotest to the PATH
export PATH=$HOME/ardupilot/Tools/autotest:$PATH

# Add ardupilot_gazebo plugin
export GZ_SIM_SYSTEM_PLUGIN_PATH=$HOME/ardupilot_gazebo/build:$GZ_SIM_SYSTEM_PLUGIN_PATH

# Optional: add ardupilot_gazebo models and worlds
export GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH=$HOME/simulation/ardupilot_gazebo/models:$HOME/simulation/ardupilot_gazebo/worlds:$GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH

# Add bluerov2_ignition models and worlds
export GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH=$HOME/colcon_ws/src/bluerov2_ignition/models:$HOME/colcon_ws/src/bluerov2_ignition/worlds:$GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH
~~~

Launch QGroundControl and leave it running during the experiments. QGroundControl serves a few purposes:
* It sends MAV_DATA_STREAM messages to ArduSub activating various data streams. In particular,
the rangefinder data injector [sim_rf.py](sim_rf.py) needs LOCAL_POSITION_NED messages to function.
* It will allow you to use a wider variety of joysticks for control.
* It makes it easy to see the state of the sub.

## Run the surftrak algorithm in SITL

Checkout the `clyde_surftrak` branch of ardupilot:
~~~
cd ~/ardupilot
git checkout clyde_surftrak
~~~

Launch SITL. Add the `-w` option to wipe the EEPROM and load default parameters:
~~~
sim_vehicle.py -w -L RATBeach -v ArduSub
~~~

Configure ArduSub to use a MAVLink rangefinder backend:
~~~
param set RNGFND1_TYPE 10       # Type = MAVLink
param set RNGFND1_MAX_CM 5000   # Ping max distance is 50m
param set RNGFND1_MIN_CM 50     # Ping min distance is 0.5m
param set RNGFND1_POS_X -0.18
param set RNGFND1_POS_Y 0.0
param set RNGFND1_POS_Z -0.095
~~~

Set RNGFND_GAIN to something less than 1.0; this reduces the oscillation caused by data delays (added 4-Jun-2023):

~~~
param set RNGFND_GAIN 0.4
~~~

Quit ArduSub.

Launch SITL again, this time drop the `-w` option to avoiding wiping the EEPROM:
~~~
sim_vehicle.py -L RATBeach -v ArduSub
~~~

Get into position by arming and diving to -10m:
* arm
* dive to -10m
* stay in MANUAL mode

Start rangefinder data injection:
~~~
cd ~/projects/ardusub_surftrak
python3 sim_rf.py --terrain terrain/trapezoid.csv
~~~

You should see rangefinder data being injected:
~~~
terrain: terrain/trapezoid.csv, Ping sensor delay: 0.8s, outliers: False
Waiting for LOCAL_POSITION_NED messages...
Time synchronized
History ready
terrain_z -20.0, sub_z -2.1610743832465538, rf 17.743925616753447
~~~

Switch to RNG_HOLD mode in mavproxy:
~~~
mode 21
~~~

You should see output like this in mavproxy showing that surftrak is running:
~~~
AP: rangefinder target is 9.83401 m
~~~

The rangefinder data will start to change, and the sub should move up and down in response.
Run for a while, then quit ArduSub.

Save the logs:
~~~
# Destination:
export LOG_DIR=~/projects/ardusub_surftrak/logs/sitl/surftrak/trapezoid

# This should be the most recent dataflash log:
export BIN_FILE=~/ardupilot/logs/00000068.BIN

# Process the data:
process_sitl.bash
~~~

Repeat as necessary for other terrain inputs.

## Run in Gazebo Sim

Run the same basic procedure as above, but with the following changes.

For surftrak, use the `clyde_surftrak` branch in ardupilot. For auto_alt use the `master` branch.

For surftrak use RNG_HOLD mode, for auto_alt use ALT_HOLD.

Wipe the EEPROM with `-w` and set up the parameters again.

Set up the `ardupilot_gazebo` rangefinder:
~~~
param set RNGFND1_TYPE 100        # Type = SITL
param set RNGFND1_FUNCTION 0      # Function = LINEAR
param set RNGFND1_MAX_CM 5000     # Ping max distance is 50m
param set RNGFND1_MIN_CM 50       # Ping min distance is 0.5m
param set RNGFND1_ORIENT 25       # Down
param set RNGFND1_POS_X -0.18
param set RNGFND1_POS_Y 0.0
param set RNGFND1_POS_Z -0.095
~~~

The Gazebo rangefinder plugin can't simulate data delays, so you'll see less oscillation.
But you can still set RNGFND_GAIN:
~~~
param set RNGFND_GAIN 0.4
~~~

For auto_alt use this param:
~~~
param set EK3_SRC1_POSZ 2       # EK3 position.z source is rangefinder
~~~

Launch the `br2_ping` model in Gazebo:
~~~
gz sim -v 3 -r sensor.world
~~~

Launch SITL with the `--model=JSON option`:
~~~
sim_vehicle.py -L RATBeach -v ArduSub --model=JSON
~~~

This will connect SITL to Gazebo Sim through the ardupilot_gazebo plugin so that they are in lock-step.

Use the joystick to run around the simulated world, and watch the sub move up and down over the terrain.

Quit ArduSub.

Save the log:
~~~
# Destination:
export LOG_DIR=~/projects/ardusub_surftrak/logs/gazebo/surftrak

# This should be the most recent dataflash log:
export BIN_FILE=~/ardupilot/logs/00000068.BIN

# Process the data:
process_gz.bash
~~~

# Results

## Files

The results are in the [logs](logs) directory:
* SITL paths are of the form `logs/sitl/algorithm/terrain/file`
* Gazebo paths are of the form `logs/gazebo/algorithm/file`

There are 2 SITL terrain files:
* trapezoid: 4m rise, ramp up and down
* sawtooth: 4m rise, jump up, ramp down

Each SITL test results in 4 files:
* ctun.csv: output of `mavlogdump.py --types CTUN --format csv 000000xx.BIN > ctun.csv`
* stamped_terrain.csv: output of `sim_rf.py`
* merged.csv: output of `merge_logs.py`
* merged.pdf: output of `graph_all.py`

Each Gazebo test results in 2 files:
* ctun.csv: output of `mavlogdump.py --types CTUN --format csv 000000xx.BIN > ctun.csv`
* ctun.pdf: output of `graph_all.py`

## Discussion

The CTUN (Control TUNing) messages are written by ArduSub at 10Hz using the latest values from the controllers.

The stamped_terrain.csv data is generated by the rangefinder data injector [sim_rf.py](sim_rf.py), which is also running
at 10Hz. However, the data injector needs to know the current position of the sub to calculate and inject an appropriate
rangefinder reading. The position information is coming from LOCAL_POSITION_NED MAVLink messages which are only sent
at 4Hz so the data isn't always up to date. This is an artifact of the way we inject rangefinder data in SITL.
It is not present in the Gazebo simulations.

In live experiments, the readings from the Ping sonar sensor were delayed ~0.8s when the sub was ~4m off the seafloor.
This could be due to the speed of sound in water, the sensor firmware, and delays caused by data pipeline.
This can cause large (> 1m) oscillations as the sub attempts to hold depth using the rangefinder. The RNGFND_GAIN
parameter can be used to attenuate the response, which minimizes the oscillations.

### surftrak in SITL (trapezoid)

The [trapezoid terrain graph](logs/sitl/surftrak/trapezoid/merged.pdf) shows a rise of 4m at a rate of 0.25m/s,
a plateau, then a fall of 4m at the same rate. There are 3 sections:
* altitude readings (in m)
* rangefinder readings (in m)
* climb rates (in cm)

Variables graphed in the altitude section:
* CTUN target z: the target z value the controller is trying to achieve
* CTUN EKF z: the best estimate of the current z value from the EKF
* CTUN barometer z: just the barometer data (the noise is simulated)
* Injection-time z: the z value used by the data injector (sim_rf.py keeps past z values to simulate a 0.8s delay)
* Terrain z: the simulated terrain height

Variables graphed in the rangefinder section:
* CTUN target rangefinder: the target rangefinder value that the controller is trying to achieve
* CTUN rangefinder: the current rangefinder reading (the noise is simulated)
* Injected rangefinder: the rangefinder reading injected by the data injector

Variables graphed in the climb rate section:
* CTUN target climb rate: the target climb rate value that the controller is trying to achieve
* CTUN climb rate: the climb rate that will be sent to the thrusters

In the altitude section you can see the controller responding fairly quickly to the rangefinder readings.

In the rangefinder section, you can see that the rangefinder readings stay in a fairly small band, indicating that
the controller is doing a reasonable job keeping the sub at a fixed distance above the terrain. There is still a little
oscillation.

The rangefinder reading delay is 0.8s. RNGFND_GAIN is 0.4.

### surftrak in SITL (sawtooth)

The [sawtooth terrain graph](logs/sitl/surftrak/sawtooth/merged.pdf) shows a sharp jump up 4m,
a plateau, and a fall of 4m at 0.25m/s. There are some significant changes from the trapezoid case:
* the sub climbs quickly, but the climb rate is clipped by the controller. The max climb rate appears to be 1m/s.
* there is significant overshoot and some oscillation.

The rangefinder reading delay is 0.8s. RNGFND_GAIN is 0.4.

### surftrak in Gazebo

The [surftrak Gazebo graph](logs/gazebo/surftrak/ctun.pdf) shows a very different simulation environment.
All data is from the CTUN messages. The terrain height is not shown.

The controller does a pretty good job keeping the rangefinder readings in a small band.

There is no rangefinder reading delay. RNGFND_GAIN is 1.0.

### auto_alt in Gazebo

The [auto_alt Gazebo graph](logs/gazebo/auto_alt/ctun.pdf) shows a radically different algorithm.
This algorithm works by injecting the rangefinder data into the EKF, replacing the barometer data.
The ALT_HOLD controller has not changed: it still seeks to maintain a constant altitude using the EKF z, but
the EKF is strongly influenced by the rangefinder reading, so this mostly has the same effect of trying 
to achieve a target rangefinder reading.

The most significant difference between the surftrak and auto_alt algorithms is the variance in the rangefinder
section. More investigation is required.

### surftrak_4_1

_Added 28-Mar-2023, SITL results re-run 4-Jun-2023 to use RNGFND_GAIN_

The original surftrak changes were made to the ardupilot `master` branch, but the current stable version of ArduSub is 
on the `Sub-4.1` branch. To make it easier to test surftrak on real hardware I copied the changes to a new branch
`clyde_surftrak_4_1` and did some additional testing in simulation. See:
* [surftrak_4_1 in SITL, trapezoid](logs/sitl/surftrak_4_1/trapezoid/merged.pdf)
* [surftrak_4_1 in Gazebo](logs/gazebo/surftrak_4_1/ctun.pdf)

The rangefinder reading delay is 0.8s. RNGFND_GAIN is 0.2.

# Pilot interface

_Added 8-Apr-2023_

The new RNG_HOLD (range hold) mode uses the ALT_HOLD (altitude hold) logic to hold a target depth, but it uses healthy
rangefinder readings to change that target depth.

Rangefinder readings are healthy if:
* there is a down-facing rangefinder installed
* there are 3 "good" readings in a row, where good is defined as between RNGFND1_MIN_CM and RNGFND1_MAX_CM
* the readings did not time out (hardcoded at 500ms)

There is a low-pass filter, but there is no outlier rejection.

If the rangefinder becomes unhealthy then the depth target is not changed and RNG_HOLD behaves exactly like ALT_HOLD.
If the rangefinder becomes healthy again RNG_HOLD will get a new target distance and start changing the target depth in
response to rangefinder readings.

The pilot can enter RNG_HOLD even if the seafloor is out of range; as soon as the seafloor is in range it will grab
a target distance and start holding that distance.

To activate RNG_HOLD in mavproxy, enter command `mode 21`.

To associate RNG_HOLD with a joystick button in QGroundControl:
* Select Vehicle Setup > Parameters
* Select the `BTNx_FUNCTION` or `BTNx_SFUNCTION` parameter for the button you want to map to RNG_HOLD
* In the Parameter Editor, select Advanced Settings
* Select Manual Entry
* Type `13` in the edit box
* Select Save

Commit message:

Re-run with the PID controller

README.md, after:

# Introduction

We propose a [surface (seafloor) tracking feature for ArduSub](https://github.com/clydemcqueen/ardupilot/tree/clyde_surftrak)
inspired by the [surface tracking feature in ArduCopter](https://ardupilot.org/copter/docs/terrain-following-manual-modes.html).
Surface tracking in ArduSub requires a down-facing rangefinder (e.g., the Blue Robotics Ping Sonar) and is activated by
selecting the new RNG_HOLD flight mode.

The [auto altitude control feature](https://discuss.bluerobotics.com/t/altimeter-and-auto-altitude/2039) was proposed previously.
This feature works by feeding rangefinder data into the ArduPilot EKF as the z position, replacing the barometer input.
This feature is not supported by the ArduSub team, but provides roughly the same functionality as surface tracking.

In this document, surface tracking is referred to as _surftrak_ and auto altitude is referred to as _auto_alt_.

The repository describes procedures to test surftrak and auto_alt in simulation, as well as the results of those tests.

We ran tests using the [ArduPilot SITL](https://ardupilot.org/dev/docs/using-sitl-for-ardupilot-testing.html)
simulator with 2 physics models:
* SITL using the built-in SIM_Submarine model; this is referred to as _SITL_
* SITL using [Gazebo Garden Sim](https://gazebosim.org/docs/all/getstarted),
the [ardupilot_gazebo plugin](https://github.com/ArduPilot/ardupilot_gazebo) and the
[bluerov2_ignition](https://github.com/clydemcqueen/bluerov2_ignition) vehicle model;
this is referred to as _Gazebo_

The SITL setup is simpler to install and uses known terrain data so the experiments can be repeated easily.

The SITL setup uses MAVLink and LOCAL_POSITION_NED messages to generate rangefinder values from the terrain data.
This setup introduces some lag.

The SITL setup behaved poorly in tests of auto_alt: the z value was much greater than 0, indicating that the sub 
was floating in the air. 

The Gazebo setup provides a much richer physics model and can be used to run many more
experiments. It works with both surftrak and auto_alt. The terrain data is generated on-the-fly by moving the sub
through the simulated world, so each experiment is unique.

# Procedure

## Install

Install ArduPilot from https://github.com/clydemcqueen/ardupilot in `~/ardupilot`

Install https://github.com/clydemcqueen/ardusub_surftrak in `~/projects/ardusub_surftrak`

Install https://github.com/clydemcqueen/bluerov2_ignition in `~/colcon_ws/src/bluerov2_ignition` and checkout the `ping_sonar` branch

Install https://github.com/ArduPilot/ardupilot_gazebo in `~/simulation/ardupilot_gazebo`

Install QGroundControl

Install Gazebo Garden

Set up some paths:
~~~
# Add ardusub_surftrak
export PATH=$HOME/projects/ardusub_surftrak:$PATH

# Add ardupilot autotest to the PATH
export PATH=$HOME/ardupilot/Tools/autotest:$PATH

# Add ardupilot_gazebo plugin
export GZ_SIM_SYSTEM_PLUGIN_PATH=$HOME/ardupilot_gazebo/build:$GZ_SIM_SYSTEM_PLUGIN_PATH

# Optional: add ardupilot_gazebo models and worlds
export GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH=$HOME/simulation/ardupilot_gazebo/models:$HOME/simulation/ardupilot_gazebo/worlds:$GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH

# Add bluerov2_ignition models and worlds
export GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH=$HOME/colcon_ws/src/bluerov2_ignition/models:$HOME/colcon_ws/src/bluerov2_ignition/worlds:$GZ_SIM_RESOURCE_PATH
~~~

Launch QGroundControl and leave it running during the experiments. QGroundControl serves a few purposes:
* It sends MAV_DATA_STREAM messages to ArduSub activating various data streams. In particular,
the rangefinder data injector [sim_rf.py](sim_rf.py) needs LOCAL_POSITION_NED messages to function.
* It will allow you to use a wider variety of joysticks for control.
* It makes it easy to see the state of the sub.

## Run the surftrak algorithm in SITL

Checkout the `clyde_surftrak` branch of ardupilot:
~~~
cd ~/ardupilot
git checkout clyde_surftrak
~~~

Launch SITL. Add the `-w` option to wipe the EEPROM and load default parameters:
~~~
sim_vehicle.py -w -L RATBeach -v ArduSub
~~~

Configure ArduSub to use a MAVLink rangefinder backend:
~~~
param set RNGFND1_TYPE 10       # Type = MAVLink
param set RNGFND1_MAX_CM 5000   # Ping max distance is 50m
param set RNGFND1_MIN_CM 50     # Ping min distance is 0.5m
param set RNGFND1_POS_X -0.18
param set RNGFND1_POS_Y 0.0
param set RNGFND1_POS_Z -0.095
~~~

Quit ArduSub.

Launch SITL again, this time drop the `-w` option to avoiding wiping the EEPROM:
~~~
sim_vehicle.py -L RATBeach -v ArduSub
~~~

Get into position by arming and diving to -10m:
* arm
* dive to -10m
* stay in MANUAL mode

Start rangefinder data injection:
~~~
cd ~/projects/ardusub_surftrak
python3 sim_rf.py --terrain terrain/trapezoid.csv
~~~

You should see rangefinder data being injected:
~~~
terrain: terrain/trapezoid.csv, Ping sensor delay: 0.8s, outliers: False
Waiting for LOCAL_POSITION_NED messages...
Time synchronized
History ready
terrain_z -20.0, sub_z -2.1610743832465538, rf 17.743925616753447
~~~

Switch to RNG_HOLD mode in mavproxy:
~~~
mode 21
~~~

You should see output like this in mavproxy showing that surftrak is running:
~~~
AP: rangefinder target is 9.83401 m
~~~

The rangefinder data will start to change, and the sub should move up and down in response.
Run for a while, then quit ArduSub.

Save the logs:
~~~
# Destination:
export LOG_DIR=~/projects/ardusub_surftrak/logs/sitl/surftrak/trapezoid

# This should be the most recent dataflash log:
export BIN_FILE=~/ardupilot/logs/00000068.BIN

# Process the data:
process_sitl.bash
~~~

Repeat as necessary for other terrain inputs.

## Run in Gazebo Sim

Run the same basic procedure as above, but with the following changes.

For surftrak, use the `clyde_surftrak` branch in ardupilot. For auto_alt use the `master` branch.

For surftrak use RNG_HOLD mode, for auto_alt use ALT_HOLD.

Wipe the EEPROM with `-w` and set up the parameters again.

Set up the `ardupilot_gazebo` rangefinder:
~~~
param set RNGFND1_TYPE 100        # Type = SITL
param set RNGFND1_FUNCTION 0      # Function = LINEAR
param set RNGFND1_MAX_CM 5000     # Ping max distance is 50m
param set RNGFND1_MIN_CM 50       # Ping min distance is 0.5m
param set RNGFND1_ORIENT 25       # Down
param set RNGFND1_POS_X -0.18
param set RNGFND1_POS_Y 0.0
param set RNGFND1_POS_Z -0.095
~~~

For auto_alt use this param:
~~~
param set EK3_SRC1_POSZ 2       # EK3 position.z source is rangefinder
~~~

Launch the `br2_ping` model in Gazebo:
~~~
gz sim -v 3 -r sensor.world
~~~

Launch SITL with the `--model=JSON option`:
~~~
sim_vehicle.py -L RATBeach -v ArduSub --model=JSON
~~~

This will connect SITL to Gazebo Sim through the ardupilot_gazebo plugin so that they are in lock-step.

Use the joystick to run around the simulated world, and watch the sub move up and down over the terrain.

Quit ArduSub.

Save the log:
~~~
# Destination:
export LOG_DIR=~/projects/ardusub_surftrak/logs/gazebo/surftrak

# This should be the most recent dataflash log:
export BIN_FILE=~/ardupilot/logs/00000068.BIN

# Process the data:
process_gz.bash
~~~

# Results

## Files

The results are in the [logs](logs) directory:
* SITL paths are of the form `logs/sitl/algorithm/terrain/file`
* Gazebo paths are of the form `logs/gazebo/algorithm/file`

There are 2 SITL terrain files:
* trapezoid: 4m rise, ramp up and down
* sawtooth: 4m rise, jump up, ramp down

Each SITL test results in 4 files:
* ctun.csv: output of `mavlogdump.py --types CTUN --format csv 000000xx.BIN > ctun.csv`
* stamped_terrain.csv: output of `sim_rf.py`
* merged.csv: output of `merge_logs.py`
* merged.pdf: output of `graph_all.py`

Each Gazebo test results in 2 files:
* ctun.csv: output of `mavlogdump.py --types CTUN --format csv 000000xx.BIN > ctun.csv`
* ctun.pdf: output of `graph_all.py`

## Discussion

The CTUN (Control TUNing) messages are written by ArduSub at 10Hz using the latest values from the controllers.

The stamped_terrain.csv data is generated by the rangefinder data injector [sim_rf.py](sim_rf.py), which is also running
at 10Hz. However, the data injector needs to know the current position of the sub to calculate and inject an appropriate
rangefinder reading. The position information is coming from LOCAL_POSITION_NED MAVLink messages which are only sent
at 4Hz so the data isn't always up to date. This is an artifact of the way we inject rangefinder data in SITL.
It is not present in the Gazebo simulations.

_Updated 5-Jun-2023:_ In live experiments, the readings from the Ping sonar sensor were delayed ~0.8s when the sub was ~4m off the seafloor.
This could be due to the speed of sound in water, the sensor firmware, and delays caused by data pipeline.
This can cause large (> 1m) oscillations as the sub attempts to hold depth using the rangefinder. A PID controller was
added to address this problem. 

### surftrak in SITL (trapezoid)

The [trapezoid terrain graph](logs/sitl/surftrak/trapezoid/merged.pdf) shows a rise of 4m at a rate of 0.25m/s,
a plateau, then a fall of 4m at the same rate. There are 3 sections:
* altitude readings (in m)
* rangefinder readings (in m)
* climb rates (in cm)

Variables graphed in the altitude section:
* CTUN target z: the target z value the controller is trying to achieve
* CTUN EKF z: the best estimate of the current z value from the EKF
* CTUN barometer z: just the barometer data (the noise is simulated)
* Injection-time z: the z value used by the data injector (sim_rf.py keeps past z values to simulate a 0.8s delay)
* Terrain z: the simulated terrain height

Variables graphed in the rangefinder section:
* CTUN target rangefinder: the target rangefinder value that the controller is trying to achieve
* CTUN rangefinder: the current rangefinder reading (the noise is simulated)
* Injected rangefinder: the rangefinder reading injected by the data injector

Variables graphed in the climb rate section:
* CTUN target climb rate: the target climb rate value that the controller is trying to achieve
* CTUN climb rate: the climb rate that will be sent to the thrusters

In the altitude section you can see the controller responding fairly quickly to the rangefinder readings.

In the rangefinder section, you can see that the rangefinder readings stay in a fairly small band, indicating that
the controller is doing a reasonable job keeping the sub at a fixed distance above the terrain. There is still a little
oscillation.

The rangefinder reading delay is 0.8s. RNGFND_PID* coefficients were set using ZN "classic" tuning:
* Ku = 0.7
* Tu = 7
* RNGFND_PID_P = 0.42
* RNGFND_PID_I = 0.875
* RNGFND_PID_D = 0.3675

### surftrak in SITL (sawtooth)

The [sawtooth terrain graph](logs/sitl/surftrak/sawtooth/merged.pdf) shows a sharp jump up 4m,
a plateau, and a fall of 4m at 0.25m/s. There are some significant changes from the trapezoid case:
* the sub climbs quickly, but the climb rate is clipped by the controller. The max climb rate appears to be 1m/s.
* there is significant overshoot and some oscillation.

Reading delay and RNGFND_PID* parameters are the same as the trapezoid case.

### surftrak in Gazebo

The [surftrak Gazebo graph](logs/gazebo/surftrak/ctun.pdf) shows a very different simulation environment.
All data is from the CTUN messages. The terrain height is not shown.

The controller does a pretty good job keeping the rangefinder readings in a small band.

_TODO re-run with the PID controller_

### auto_alt in Gazebo

The [auto_alt Gazebo graph](logs/gazebo/auto_alt/ctun.pdf) shows a radically different algorithm.
This algorithm works by injecting the rangefinder data into the EKF, replacing the barometer data.
The ALT_HOLD controller has not changed: it still seeks to maintain a constant altitude using the EKF z, but
the EKF is strongly influenced by the rangefinder reading, so this mostly has the same effect of trying 
to achieve a target rangefinder reading.

The most significant difference between the surftrak and auto_alt algorithms is the variance in the rangefinder
section. More investigation is required.

### surftrak_4_1

_Added 28-Mar-2023, SITL results re-run 4-Jun-2023 to use RNGFND_GAIN_

The original surftrak changes were made to the ardupilot `master` branch, but the current stable version of ArduSub is 
on the `Sub-4.1` branch. To make it easier to test surftrak on real hardware I copied the changes to a new branch
`clyde_surftrak_4_1` and did some additional testing in simulation. See:
* [surftrak_4_1 in SITL, trapezoid](logs/sitl/surftrak_4_1/trapezoid/merged.pdf)
* [surftrak_4_1 in Gazebo](logs/gazebo/surftrak_4_1/ctun.pdf)

The rangefinder reading delay is 0.8s. RNGFND_GAIN is 0.2.

_TODO re-run with the PID controller_

# Pilot interface

_Added 8-Apr-2023_

The new RNG_HOLD (range hold) mode uses the ALT_HOLD (altitude hold) logic to hold a target depth, but it uses healthy
rangefinder readings to change that target depth.

Rangefinder readings are healthy if:
* there is a down-facing rangefinder installed
* there are 3 "good" readings in a row, where good is defined as between RNGFND1_MIN_CM and RNGFND1_MAX_CM
* the readings did not time out (hardcoded at 500ms)

There is a low-pass filter, but there is no outlier rejection.

If the rangefinder becomes unhealthy then the depth target is not changed and RNG_HOLD behaves exactly like ALT_HOLD.
If the rangefinder becomes healthy again RNG_HOLD will get a new target distance and start changing the target depth in
response to rangefinder readings.

The pilot can enter RNG_HOLD even if the seafloor is out of range; as soon as the seafloor is in range it will grab
a target distance and start holding that distance.

To activate RNG_HOLD in mavproxy, enter command `mode 21`.

To associate RNG_HOLD with a joystick button in QGroundControl:
* Select Vehicle Setup > Parameters
* Select the `BTNx_FUNCTION` or `BTNx_SFUNCTION` parameter for the button you want to map to RNG_HOLD
* In the Parameter Editor, select Advanced Settings
* Select Manual Entry
* Type `13` in the edit box
* Select Save
